Americans are reeling from the early weeks of Trump 2.0 and President Donald Trump got a primetime chance to explain the fast and furious start to his return to power in an address to a joint session of Congress.
He made the case for the trade wars hes started with Canada and Mexico defended his effort with Elon Musk to downsize and remake American government and faced loud opposition and heckling from Democrats one of whom was removed from the chamber.
Read Trumps speech annotated with context and fact checks below.
Johnson and Vance behind Trump are a visual representation of the hold Republicans have on Washington. Their House and Senate majorities are small but they control every branch of power at the moment.
It sure has been swift and unrelenting. Agree with it or not but Trump working with Elon Musk at his Department of Government Efficiency has set the pace to completely remake the US government and redefine the place of the US in the world order.
Trump will always say hes accomplished more than anyone. Hes got a way to go to catch presidents like FDR.
He can claim a mandate having won the popular vote but its by no means historic. Rep. Al Green rose to yell at Trump when he said this and was shouted down by Republicans yelling USA.
Actually a CNN Poll conducted by SSRS and released this week found that just 39 of Americans said the country was moving in the right direction compared with 45 who said it was moving in the wrong direction. Thats a drop from when Trump started his first term.
From CNNs Daniel Dale This claim needs context. If Trump was referring to the commonly cited NFIB Small Business Optimism Index his claim about a 41point increase appears to be a reference to one component  the percentage of smallbusiness owners expecting the economy to improve. That measure did soar a net 41 percentage points from preelection October to postelection November. Trump didnt mention that the total index then declined in January to a level that is still high but lower than it was under Trump in September 2020 and October 2020  less than five years ago.
Johnson warns Rep. Green by name before the sergeant at arms walks down the aisle and escorts him out of the chamber. Green by the way was among the first lawmakers calling for Trumps impeachment during his first term and has again called for Trump to be impeached even though he just recently took office.
It is an epic pace of executive orders. Some are more consequential than others. Track them all sorted by general topic here.
Its not clear who stated Trumps presidency has been second only to George Washingtons in terms of success. Trump has now said it. Hes compared himself to George Washington before.
From CNNs Daniel Dale and Devan Cole Trump claimed that since taking office again he has already achieved the lowest number of illegal border crossings ever recorded. Thats false. He could have accurately said the number of Border Patrol apprehensions at the southern border in February  the first full month of his second term  is the lowest in many decades at least if its true that the number was 8326 as he claimed on social media before the speech. But official federal statistics show there were fewer Border Patrol encounters with migrants at the southwest border in some of the months of the early 1960s.
From CNNs Daniel Dale and Haley Britzky There is no evidence for the presidents claim which Trumps own presidential campaign was unable to corroborate. The campaign was unable to provide any evidence even for his narrower claim that South American countries in particular were emptying their mental health facilities to somehow dump patients upon the US.
As Trump says Democrats will never stand and applaud him cameras show some of them holding small signs that say things like Musk steals and false.
A hallmark of Trumps politics is that whenever he is in charge he says things are great. And whenever Democrats are in charge he says they are horrible.
From CNNs Ella Nilsen This claim is inaccurate. Former President Joe Biden pledged to pay 11.4 billion per year toward international climate financing upon taking office. However the US contribution to a global finance goal ended up being far lower because Congress appropriated less money than Bidens goal. Bidens State Department announced it had allocated 5.8 billion to international climate finance by 2022. US climate finance contributions have never reached trillions of dollars.
Trump did indeed remove the US from international agreements and groups. He also removed the US from the Paris Climate Agreement during his first term. But Biden put the US back in.
From CNNs Bryan Mena There has never been a federal mandate prohibiting Americans from buying gasolinepowered cars which he claimed existed in his inaugural address. During the Biden administration legislation was passed to support electric vehicles. Trump signed an executive order shortly after taking office in January seeking to reverse that. However eliminating those policies may require congressional action.
More than half of federal workers were already working from the office full or parttime when Trump took office but his requirement has been cited as an effort to cull the federal workforce.
From CNNs Daniel Dale and Devan Cole Thats false. Trumps two federal indictments were brought by a special counsel Jack Smith. Smith was appointed in November 2022 by Attorney General Merrick Garland a Biden appointee  but that is not proof that Biden was involved in the prosecution effort much less that Biden personally ordered the indictments.
The English as a national language and Gulf of America efforts can be tied together with a very clear racial overtone.
The antidiversity initiatives are visible in the chamber. Trump removed Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Charles Q. Brown a Black man and Defense Secretary Pete Hegseth fired Admiral Lisa Franchetti the chief of the Navy and first woman to serve on the Joint Chiefs whom Hegseth had described as a DEI hire.
As CNNs John King said Common sense is a Trump term for what others would call culture war English as the official language Gulf of America Mount McKinley transgender issues and so on. It plays well with his base but those issues dont lower prices at the grocery store so when he got there ... it is all blame Biden.
Trump may soon face criticism over inflation. The price of eggs has risen in part because of avian flu and he has imposed tariffs on goods from Mexico Canada and China.
From CNNs Piper Hudspeth Blackburn Elisabeth Buchwald and Vanessa Yurkevich The avian flu has caused egg prices to rise because the United States Department of Agriculture requires the culling of entire flocks to stop the spread if the virus is detected. Its a practice that occurred during the Biden administration but also one that is continuing under Trump as the virus continues to infect flocks nationwide. When Biden took office the average price of a carton of a dozen grade A eggs across US cities was 1.47 according to Bureau of Labor Statistics data. By the time Biden left office in January a carton of eggs cost 4.95 on average a 2.7 increase from a year prior. Due to short supply egg prices are projected to increase by 41.1 this year according to the USDAs food outlook as of February 25.
All oil is not the same. CNNs Ella Nilsen and Amy OKruk explained in a recent story how much of what the US can get at home might not help lower gas prices.
Is DOGE headed by Elon Musk There have been conflicting reports.
Democrats have been criticized by Trump and others for not embracing Musks cuts which Republicans describe as eliminating waste and fraud. But Democrats have also not been included in the process.
From CNNs Deidre McPhillips Trumps claim is false. Between the 2021 and 2022 fiscal years the National Institutes of Health awarded a total of 477121 to three projects that involved administering feminizing hormone therapy to monkeys to understand how it may affect their immune system and make them more susceptible to HIV. Its not clear where the 8 million figure came from or why Trump referenced studies in mice instead of monkeys.
It has been difficult to confirm the details on many of these programs. DOGE has a very simple website that is not much more than a version of the groups feed on Musks X social media platform.
Most of what Trump mentioned is spending on foreign aid although it is a fraction  around 1  of the annual budget.
From CNNs Casey Tolan This figure which is uncorroborated needs context. Musk and other Trump allies have claimed DOGEs work is aimed at targeting waste fraud and abuse. But DOGE has not released evidence that the contracts it has canceled were fraudulent. And at least some of the cuts have been reversed amid criticism.
Heres that GAO report. Its a little more complicated than Trump suggests. There are distinct concepts  improper payments and fraud  that need to be considered.
From CNNs Tami Luhby and Daniel Dale The vast majority of these people do not have dates of death listed in Social Securitys database. But that doesnt mean they are actually receiving monthly benefits. Public data from the Social Security Administration shows that about 89000 people age 99 or over were receiving Social Security benefits in December 2024 not even close to the millions Trump invoked.
Trump has promised not to cut Social Security but clearly feels that eliminating fraud is not a cut. He will need to prove there is fraud and hes asking Attorney General Pam Bondi to prosecute some people.
Trump made his political name promising mass deportations of undocumented immigrants from mostly poor countries. Here hes inviting the wealthy to buy access to the US.
The last president who oversaw a budget surplus was Bill Clinton who did it with major prodding from Republicans in Congress. Recent annual budget deficits have been more than 1 trillion although those included emergency spending and Trumps firstterm tax cuts.
One reason Trump needs to cut government spending is to pay for these additional tax cuts he has promised.
Honda announced it will produce the hybrid Civic in Indiana in order to avoid Trumps tariffs on Mexico according to Reuters.
During the campaign Trump frequently talked about his love for the word tariff. Here he seems to be explaining it to Americans.
This is the meatiest portion of the speech so far. Trump is trying to build support for his tariffs which alarm many Americans and also alarmed the stock market which dropped this week.
Or perhaps this means countries have a little less than a month to negotiate.
From CNNs Daniel Dale and Tami Luhby Trumps claim needs context. Tariffs are paid by US importers not foreign exporters and its easy to find specific examples of companies that passed along the cost of the tariffs to US consumers.
The CHIPS Act which was intended to build up a domestic semiconductor industry was passed with bipartisan majorities in the House and Senate and signed by Biden into law. Trumps administration has been working to cancel some contracts.
Farmers  or people in rural America  are part of Trumps base of support. But they will be among those hurt most by his trade war.
Hats off to Jeff.
Economists arent so sure the disturbance will be so little from these tariffs. They could impact everyday Americans to the tune of 1200 per year and thats before the reciprocal tariffs Trump promised in this speech.
Deepfakes are a major problem.
Its surprising that Trump waited this long into the speech to talk about his deportation efforts. His administration has struggled to work as fast as Trump would like. In fact the pace of deportation flights so far has not been much different from that under Biden in 2024 according to data analyzed by CNNs Priscilla Alvarez and Rene Rigdon.
Rileys death was a major campaign issue for Republicans and passing the Laken Riley Act which requires certain migrants to be detained when accused of a crime was a major victory for Trump and Republicans.
Springfield is the place where Trump and Vance falsely insisted Haitian refugees were eating dogs and cats. It wasnt true.
Jocelyn Nungarays death was also a campaign issue.
Trumps signing of an order during the joint address to Congress seems like it must be a first.
There was a major standing ovation for Ortiz who teared up.
Learn more about Rafael Caro Quintero and the 28 other alleged criminals extradited to the US from Mexico.
Trump has overstated the amount of fentanyl coming into the US from Canada. It is a fraction of what authorities seize.
Trump is referring to Eisenhowers horribly named Operation Wetback.
Republicans will have to coalesce around a government spending bill to deliver this funding to Trump. They have an extremely small majority in the House and Democrats are unlikely to help them.
Trumps firstterm FBI Director Chris Wray had years left on his 10year term but Trump made clear he wanted Patel for the job. Patel a conspiracy theorist was among Trumps more controversial nominees.
Republicans generally support police but Trumps pardon of January 6 rioters who attacked Capitol Police complicates that.
DJ was dressed in a police uniform and was held up to applause.
It was a touching moment when DJ hugged the Secret Service director. Trump has elevated the showmanship associated with guests at these presidential addresses.
Kennedy of course has questioned whether vaccines are to blame although that theory has been debunked. As HHS secretary he has said he wants to see more evidence about vaccines. Trumps portrayal of the rise in autism rates is also distorted.
This type of law would likely not be able to pass through the Senate as long as the filibuster exists.
As Trump says wokeness is gone from the military the camera panned to top generals all of whom are now White men.
That makes Jasons year clearly. Getting into West Point is hard
One major difference between Israel and the US is size. CNN recently reported on the effort to make a missile defense shield over Guam which is facing obstacles.
BlackRock is the company buying ports on either side of the canal from Hong Kong.
From CNNs Daniel Dale Trump repeated his false claim that 38000 Americans died during the building of the Panama Canal. That figure is not even close to true experts on the canals construction say.
If Trump obtains Greenland and the Panama Canal it will signal a new period of American expansion something that has not occurred since the early 20th century.
What Greenlanders want is an open question. CNNs Donie OSullivan traveled there in February to talk to residents about joining the US.
Families of some of the service members killed at Abbey Gate have been major backers of Trump. They appeared with him at the Republican National Convention.
Interestingly Trump did not mention his controversial and seriously outofthebox idea to displace Palestinians and turn Gaza into a sort of Riviera.
Pocahontas is Trumps insulting nickname for Sen. Elizabeth Warren. She applauded at his comment.
Trump keeps using the 350 billion figure but the US has actually spent much less than that. Also the US has spent less than Europe according to the Kiel Institute which has tracked Ukraine aid.
Trump yelled at Zelensky in the Oval Office less than a week ago this week he paused US military aid to Ukraine. Trump has clearly pivoted toward Russia and away from Europe but news of Zelenskys letter is a major development.
The US released a Russian money launderer in exchange for Fogel.
The story of Trumps nearassassination is incredible.
Many of his supporters agree that he survived through divine intervention.
Trump veers away from the insults division and campaign speech language he dished out earlier in the speech to end on an inspiring note.
When he said Mars there was a yell of approval. Elon Musk Trumps first term was marked by an effort to return to the moon. Musk would prefer to focus on Mars.
